README.md, before:

# nushell-playground

📚 Learning and exploring Nushell.


## Overview

I will forever use Bash (hyperbole), but I want more power, feasible extensibility and better ergonomics. I've had my eye on Nushell
for a few years, and it is rich with features at this point. This repository is for me to learn Nushell.


## Instructions

Follow these instructions to run some scripts and experiment with Nushell.

1. Pre-requisite: Nushell
   * I installed it with Homebrew. I'm using 0.98.0.
2. Start a Nushell session.
   * ```shell
     nu
     ```
3. Import all exposed definitions from the `bookmark-launcher.nu` file.
   * ```nushell
     use bookmark-launcher.nu *
     ```
4. Try out a command and get a feel for completions
   * Type `launch-b` and then press `Tab`. The full `launch-bookmark` command will appear.
   * Try `Tab` again and you will see `reference` and `fun` as suggestions. The `reference` suggestion is highlighted already.
   * Press `Tab` once more to cycle to the `fun` suggestion.
   * Press `Enter` to select `fun`. The `fun` string will be added to the command line.
   * Press `Space` and then `Tab` to see the completions related to `fun`. They are `youtube` and `twitter.com`.
   * Press `Enter` to select `youtube`.
   * You'll get a message like the following:
     ```
     You chose fun today. Launching https://youtube.com ...
     ```
5. Try the `lb` alias
   * Aliases are an important way to compress your commandline workflow, especially for frequently used commands. Type `lb`
     and follow in the same steps as above but launch something else.
   * Study the `bookmark-launcher.nu` file, hack on it, and add your own bookmarks.
   * Next, let's try a custom completer
6. Exit the current Nushell session with `exit`
7. Start a new Nushell session and load our config for a custom completer
   * ```shell
     nu --env-config completer.nu --config ""
     ```
8. Type out the sample command and try out the auto-completion
   * Type out `describe-color ` (including the space) and then press `Tab`. You should see the completion options like
     the following.
   * ```text
     blue
     red
     green
     ```
9. Now, let's try *overlays*
   * ```nushell
     overlay use bookmark-launcher.nu
     ``` 
   * Now you can use commands like `launch-bookmark`, just like before. The difference is that you can unload the
     overlay. Try listing the overlays, then unloading the `bookmark-launcher` overlay and listing the overlays again.
     Altogether, it should look like the following.
   * ```text
     $ overlay use bookmark-launcher.nu
     $ overlay list
     ╭───┬───────────────────╮
     │ 0 │ zero              │
     │ 1 │ bookmark-launcher │
     ╰───┴───────────────────╯
     $ overlay hide bookmark-launcher
     $ overlay list
     ╭───┬──────╮
     │ 0 │ zero │
     ╰───┴──────╯
     ```


## Wish List

General clean-ups, TODOs and things I wish to implement for this project

* [x] DONE Consider writing a plugin.
* [x] DONE Make the auto-completion example my own.
* [x] DONE (Answer: use the right arrow key) Figure out the auto-completion UX. I'm getting a bit confused about when/why it auto-completes from historical
  commands and how to choose that completion. If I press enter of course that just runs the text I've typed so far and if
  press tab it just cycles through normal completions not the historical suggestion.
* [ ] What are the debugging and maybe other meta features of Nushell? Are there bells and whistles with regard to
  logging or maybe some statistics?
* [x] DONE (`use ~/repos/opensource/nu_scripts/custom-completions/git/git-completions.nu *`) Load Nushell-maintained completions from ["nu_scripts"](https://github.com/nushell/nu_scripts/tree/4eab7ea772f0a288c99a79947dd332efc1884315/custom-completions)
* [x] Custom completer.
* [x] DONE (Implemented in my other codebase: <https://github.com/dgroomes/my-config/commit/177b8714141a93b4ed2f76b4ff30d9f60a065b44>) Fallback to Bash for completions. While Carapace and Fish are interesting, I've already mastered Bash completions.
  Also see [this person's experience with Carapace and their decision to use the Fish completer in Nushell](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=40131630).
   * DONE Wrap my head around how to even trigger a Bash completion programmatically from even a non-Nushell context.
   * DONE Wire up a custom completer. This will involve creating an executable Bash script that takes envrionment
     variables like `COMP_LINE` and `COMP_POINT`, loads the 'bash-completion' library, autoloads the Bash completion
     script for the "command-under-completion" and finally generates the completions. 
   * SKIP (No it's fast. Computers these days are good) Do I need to keep a Bash subprocess running because it's so slow to start up and load completions, especially large
     ones like `docker` (5,000 lines of Bash code).
* [ ] How should I time nu startup? Does it have anything built-in to measure anything? It would be easy to just handwrite
  the couple lines but curious if there is something more interesting that I'm missing.
* [ ] When I do `cp $nu.config-path ~/some-directo` and as I'm trying to autocomplete the directory name, I don't get
  completions, I just get `NO RECORDS FOUND`. But in some other contexts with `cp` I do get completion. What's going on?
  I have read that the fallback to file completions doesn't work in some cases.
* [x] DONE How do errors work? I know there is a try/catch, but I want a feel for it.
  * <https://www.nushell.sh/book/stdout_stderr_exit_codes.html#using-the-complete-command>
  * What's the idiomatic way to throw a low-noise error? I don't always want the line of source thing. I just want red
    text and a message. Solution: use `--unspanned`.
  * Error handling behavior for external commands is a bit of a gotcha and will likely change, but I think it's
    complicated so probably not soon. See <https://github.com/nushell/nushell/issues/10633>. I think I'm going to use
    `| complete` a lot, which will be more robust but isn't really in the spirit of shell scripting. 
* [x] DONE (moved to my <https://github.com/dgroomes/llm-playground>) Tic-Tac-Toe". This is an application of Nu the langauge plus an exploration of LLMs/Ollamas and
  "tool support" (previously known as "function calling"?). This doesn't exactly fit in the "playground"-style
  repository because it doesn't zero in on specific features of Nushell, but it's an application of it and I just need
  a place to do this work.
* [x] DONE How do overlays work?
  * <https://www.nushell.sh/book/overlays.html>
  * I haven't totally grokked this. I think other Nushell users bind a 'reload overlay' command to make this workflow
    even more compressed. 
* [x] DONE Hooks.


## Reference

* [Nushell](https://www.nushell.sh)

Commit message:

`hello.nu` script (useful example with `main` command)

README.md, after:

# nushell-playground

📚 Learning and exploring Nushell.


## Overview

I will forever use Bash (hyperbole), but I want more power, feasible extensibility and better ergonomics. I've had my eye on Nushell
for a few years, and it is rich with features at this point. This repository is for me to learn Nushell.


## Instructions

Follow these instructions to run some scripts and experiment with Nushell.

1. Pre-requisite: Nushell
   * I installed it with Homebrew. I'm using 0.98.0.
2. Start a fresh Nushell session.
3. Run a hello world script
   * ```nushell
     ./hello.nu
     ```
4. Import all exposed definitions from the `bookmark-launcher.nu` file.
   * ```nushell
     use bookmark-launcher.nu *
     ```
5. Try out a command and get a feel for completions
   * Type `launch-b` and then press `Tab`. The full `launch-bookmark` command will appear.
   * Try `Tab` again and you will see `reference` and `fun` as suggestions. The `reference` suggestion is highlighted already.
   * Press `Tab` once more to cycle to the `fun` suggestion.
   * Press `Enter` to select `fun`. The `fun` string will be added to the command line.
   * Press `Space` and then `Tab` to see the completions related to `fun`. They are `youtube` and `twitter.com`.
   * Press `Enter` to select `youtube`.
   * You'll get a message like the following:
     ```
     You chose fun today. Launching https://youtube.com ...
     ```
6. Try the `lb` alias
   * Aliases are an important way to compress your commandline workflow, especially for frequently used commands. Type `lb`
     and follow in the same steps as above but launch something else.
   * Study the `bookmark-launcher.nu` file, hack on it, and add your own bookmarks.
   * Next, let's try a custom completer
7. Exit the current Nushell session with `exit`
8. Start a new Nushell session and load our config for a custom completer
   * ```shell
     nu --env-config completer.nu --config ""
     ```
9. Type out the sample command and try out the auto-completion
   * Type out `describe-color ` (including the space) and then press `Tab`. You should see the completion options like
     the following.
   * ```text
     blue
     red
     green
     ```
10. Now, let's try *overlays*
    * ```nushell
      overlay use bookmark-launcher.nu
      ``` 
    * Now you can use commands like `launch-bookmark`, just like before. The difference is that you can unload the
      overlay. Try listing the overlays, then unloading the `bookmark-launcher` overlay and listing the overlays again.
      Altogether, it should look like the following.
    * ```text
      $ overlay use bookmark-launcher.nu
      $ overlay list
      ╭───┬───────────────────╮
      │ 0 │ zero              │
      │ 1 │ bookmark-launcher │
      ╰───┴───────────────────╯
      $ overlay hide bookmark-launcher
      $ overlay list
      ╭───┬──────╮
      │ 0 │ zero │
      ╰───┴──────╯
      ```


## Wish List

General clean-ups, TODOs and things I wish to implement for this project

* [x] DONE Consider writing a plugin.
* [x] DONE Make the auto-completion example my own.
* [x] DONE (Answer: use the right arrow key) Figure out the auto-completion UX. I'm getting a bit confused about when/why it auto-completes from historical
  commands and how to choose that completion. If I press enter of course that just runs the text I've typed so far and if
  press tab it just cycles through normal completions not the historical suggestion.
* [ ] What are the debugging and maybe other meta features of Nushell? Are there bells and whistles with regard to
  logging or maybe some statistics?
* [x] DONE (`use ~/repos/opensource/nu_scripts/custom-completions/git/git-completions.nu *`) Load Nushell-maintained completions from ["nu_scripts"](https://github.com/nushell/nu_scripts/tree/4eab7ea772f0a288c99a79947dd332efc1884315/custom-completions)
* [x] Custom completer.
* [x] DONE (Implemented in my other codebase: <https://github.com/dgroomes/my-config/commit/177b8714141a93b4ed2f76b4ff30d9f60a065b44>) Fallback to Bash for completions. While Carapace and Fish are interesting, I've already mastered Bash completions.
  Also see [this person's experience with Carapace and their decision to use the Fish completer in Nushell](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=40131630).
   * DONE Wrap my head around how to even trigger a Bash completion programmatically from even a non-Nushell context.
   * DONE Wire up a custom completer. This will involve creating an executable Bash script that takes envrionment
     variables like `COMP_LINE` and `COMP_POINT`, loads the 'bash-completion' library, autoloads the Bash completion
     script for the "command-under-completion" and finally generates the completions. 
   * SKIP (No it's fast. Computers these days are good) Do I need to keep a Bash subprocess running because it's so slow to start up and load completions, especially large
     ones like `docker` (5,000 lines of Bash code).
* [ ] How should I time nu startup? Does it have anything built-in to measure anything? It would be easy to just handwrite
  the couple lines but curious if there is something more interesting that I'm missing.
* [ ] When I do `cp $nu.config-path ~/some-directo` and as I'm trying to autocomplete the directory name, I don't get
  completions, I just get `NO RECORDS FOUND`. But in some other contexts with `cp` I do get completion. What's going on?
  I have read that the fallback to file completions doesn't work in some cases.
* [x] DONE How do errors work? I know there is a try/catch, but I want a feel for it.
  * <https://www.nushell.sh/book/stdout_stderr_exit_codes.html#using-the-complete-command>
  * What's the idiomatic way to throw a low-noise error? I don't always want the line of source thing. I just want red
    text and a message. Solution: use `--unspanned`.
  * Error handling behavior for external commands is a bit of a gotcha and will likely change, but I think it's
    complicated so probably not soon. See <https://github.com/nushell/nushell/issues/10633>. I think I'm going to use
    `| complete` a lot, which will be more robust but isn't really in the spirit of shell scripting. 
* [x] DONE (moved to my <https://github.com/dgroomes/llm-playground>) Tic-Tac-Toe". This is an application of Nu the langauge plus an exploration of LLMs/Ollamas and
  "tool support" (previously known as "function calling"?). This doesn't exactly fit in the "playground"-style
  repository because it doesn't zero in on specific features of Nushell, but it's an application of it and I just need
  a place to do this work.
* [x] DONE How do overlays work?
  * <https://www.nushell.sh/book/overlays.html>
  * I haven't totally grokked this. I think other Nushell users bind a 'reload overlay' command to make this workflow
    even more compressed. 
* [x] DONE Hooks.


## Reference

* [Nushell](https://www.nushell.sh)
